that they could interact with their colleagues in
related disciplines, particularly in the
breeding world, genetic improvement. And I think
that was a sound
decision. But the net effect of starting that
competitive grants program did two things. One,
it got us way down the road as far as the quality of
science is concerned in the experiment station.
And two, it made our faculty much more competitive
for external funds. And this year, and that impact
is still being felt because this year the
Experiment Station brought in sixty million
dollars in external funds. And that number has
been going up since 1983 or whenever we started.
The second thing we did, I think, came along later.
This was after Charlie Hartson got here. Charlie
was but he had some good ideas, he just had a hard
time getting them implemented. But we did start
the crop biotechnology program and the facility
out there on the west campus now. And that's turned
out to be a real winner for us.
first-rate, cutting-edge science, lab space,
and those guys are getting money out of the
National Genome Program and this sort of thing
now, so they're much more competitive than they
have been in the past.
As the Associate Director, your view, your
responsibility reached entirely all across And
would it be correct to say you were the person most
likely to be in the office day after day after day
while Neville Clark as the director was more on the
road? Well, yeah, that's the way it worked out. I
traveled a good bit, but he was...
He was in pretty high demand in the state, and of
course when the legislature was in session, you
know, how that goes. Was
Brian Neville the spy on Hayes and she was the judge
of the... Neville is probably the brightest, most
organized guy I ever ran into in my life. He has a...
a pretty short string. He doesn't tolerate poor
performance or what he views as
idle time or whatever you want to call it. He works
like hell and if you try to keep up with him you'll
kill yourself. But he is tremendously
productive. I've never seen a guy more productive
in my life. He'll come out of a meeting and going
his, well, right now, he started out taking notes
on his laptop, and people began to become offended
by the clickety-clickety-click on that laptop.
But in those days, before we had laptops, he would
get in his office and transcribe his notes and have
a, have those in the hands of all the participants
within
24 hours. He could just get things done well and get
them done in a hurry. Let's see, I just realized one
of the things we overlooked. Let's go back to the
department building days. Who were the key staff
persons in the department head's office in those
years that you were department head? The
departmental secretary and the bookkeeper. Oh,
gosh, I had a bunch of them. The first one
was departmental secretary was Susan Beale, who
is Mike Beale's wife, who is on the city council of
Bryant.
And I can't remember, oh the bookkeeper was a lady
by the name of Betty Carter. She stayed with the
department a long time after I, well after I left.
But then I went to several other departmental
secretaries as you tend to do. Being a small
department, the good ones tend to get picked off by
the larger departments. I remember Salt and Crop
Science rated us one time for our departmental
secretary.
You mentioned Horace Byers. Do you have any
impression of him as the chief academic officer?
Not really. My contact with him was fairly
limited. Harry and I would go over there when we had
some business to do with him, and he struck me as
being pretty businesslike and not much small
talk. Thank you, and that was it. What about a
fellow named John Calvin?
Yeah, I've had a number of engagements with John,
and I really like him. And we've come to appreciate
him more in the later years of our association than
early on. But he could be tough.
I can't remember a particular incident, but you
just have feelings about people, how you want to
approach them and how you want to deal with them. I
always felt that you wanted to deal with John
fairly carefully. But I gained the respect for him
and appreciated him. Chuckling because working
for him for about five years, and those were the
brightest, most exhilarating years of my life.
And how quickly he could work through a stack of
mail and come to a pretty clear decision that
almost never did I want to second guess. Did you
have any impression of Dr. Williams? Oh, I didn't
have that much association with him, although I
was sitting right next to him at the board meeting
when he announced his resignation. And I'll never
forget that. Well, you know, the board sits around
their table, and there was a table down at the south
end of the room there,
and it had two or three chairs around it. And for
some reason, he and I were sitting there. I don't
remember why. And the hangers on at board meetings
tend to gather around the edges there and be ready
to look intelligent when called upon and that sort
of thing. But we were just cruising along there.
They were going through the agenda and reached a
particular point. I don't remember when, but he
said, I guess a
guy from Granbury. Howard Wilde. Yeah, Clyde
Wilde.
Asked him to let him say something, and
Clyde Wilde said, yes, I will be. Announced that he
intended to resign as chancellor. What do you call
wisdom in the action? It was very quiet.
Very quiet. That would have been, if I'm not
mistaken, about 7 or 8. Right. It was late 77 or
early 78. I can't remember exactly when. All
right. Let's back up then. Dr. Miller, Jarvis
Miller moved from being Director of the
Experiment Station to being President in late 76.
Calhoun resigned and Matt Prescott appointed as
the new Vice President. That's right. How did that
affect you over in the Experiment Station, those
changes? Well, significantly because
What happened then, certainly when Jack Williams
resigned, Jarvis literally took over as
chancellor. I mean, as far as the agencies were
concerned. And so when we wanted to do business at
that level, we did business with Jarvis. Prior to
that time, you had been reporting the station has
been reporting to Dr. Wiggins. That's right. Did
it make any difference in the way the station
actually operated at that point? Did it make any
difference where it reported? Not really, except
there was about a year there where the Folks out in
the state who had an association with Jarvis when
he was Experiment Station Director all began to
huddle around. We couldn't go anywhere. And if
Jarvis went with us, I remember one time we went
down to visit H.B. Zachary. And my goodness, you
never saw such a clamor in your life. Aggie Button
was rung in his office and all that. Aggies were
told to report to the classroom or to the
conference room and, you know, and it was that kind
of stuff going on. So there was somewhat of a
distraction while Jarvis
you know, carry the title as president of the
university, he functioned in a broader context
than that. Right. Now, then Frank Huber becomes
the chancellor. Right. And soon there was a tussle
between him and President Miller over where...
The boundary was, yeah. And I presume we all
sometimes kind of in the... caught in the middle of
that flight? Yeah.
Where do you think the station would have
preferred to report? Well, I think of course, let
me mention one other thing.
Jarvis had not been in job long until he brought
Perry and O.D. in as his vice president for
agriculture and vice president for whatever. And
so that began to, you know, those guys tried to find
their place in the Sun because those were totally
new positions. And, of course, he did, I guess, the
same thing over in engineering. Fred Benson, I
guess, was vice president. Uh-huh. And they were
certainly OD and Perry were trying to figure out
what to do. And of course, the tendency when you
don't know what to do is to go start looking at the
folks that are working for you and find out what
they're doing. Well, they came down and, or Perry
came down and put the arm on the level and said, you
know, I think I'll be running the experiment
station. But that's where it was. But, uh...
But that lingered, that had lingering effects on
the period of the Gaines-Chester.
I
went to the summer of 1908. In the spring of 1908,
it's been about a year. meeting
formally and informally with Vice President
Prescott and with President Miller fairly often,
began to realize there was a real
behind-the-scenes discussion going on about
where the stations and services reported. And Dr.
Miller wanted to report to him, and then he to the
Chancellor. Would you like to get more things for
y'all being caught in the middle of that I think the
problem there was sort of diffused a bit by the fact
that Perry and O.D. were sitting there. Neville
reported Perry.
Dan Funstiel, I guess, who was the Director of
Extension then, and Fred Benson and so on. And so
that,
I don't recall, you know, we used to, there was
flack, no question about it, and we used to get
caught up in some of it, but we moved along pretty
good. But I don't think it slowed us down. I drove
away to town Tuesday right after lunch, and Dr.
Miller learned late the next afternoon that he was
being terminated. Were you and your key
associates aware that that termination was about
to occur? Are you at liberty to say when or how y'all
came away? Well, it came from the board. Were you
aware of that in advance? Yes. And the word was
coming out of the board that they were getting
ready to terminate me. Chuckie.
Right.
Right. See, Perry and O.D. were made deputy
chancellors somewhere during that time, during
that, after Jarvis was terminated. Did
Chancellor Huber change anything about the
direction of agriculture? No. So that y'all were
able to then operate as you thought best. What
about with any of his successors, any of the other
chancellors he followed? No, there was, you know,
Haskell areas, about every four or five years, the
issue of where the service was ought to report
comes up. And it's still, you know, kind of on the
table now, or recently. And so that used to pop up
with Hanson. with Chancellor and all the
questions came up. And Hanson had been president
of Purdue, where he had everything. And he's
covered there. And he didn't understand why this
ought to be different. And one day, we were
briefing him on something. I forgot what it was.
And we were up there in the conference room in
Williamsville. And all of a sudden, he slammed his
hand down on the tabletop. Now I understand. Now I
understand. So, you know,
nobody really dabbled in our business during that
period of time. And I think Frank Vandiver... I had
no interest whatsoever. I don't, you know,
Neville would go, you know, sit with him every now
and then over areas of mutual concern or interest,
and he was always polite and cordial and
everything, but he wasn't that mean. I was back on
campus in the 80s visiting, and he heard I was here,
and he invited me over to his office. and
he said he had been hassled by a local group
thinking that A&M ought to give a lot more
attention to creating a strong program in fine
arts, art, music, drama, and so forth. And he said,
what do you think? I tried to put on a blank face, and
I said, well, let me ask you a question, too, before
I respond. You were able to do one chip, yes, sir,
you said. I said, describe your program in fine
arts at Purdue. And he said, oh, no, that would go
with Indiana University. I said, oh, oh, oh, well,
describe the quality of the engineering program
at Indiana. He said, no, we had that at Purdue. I
said, oh, you mean in Indiana it was clearly
delineated which programs were on which campus.
He said, oh, that's right. I said, oh, okay. I said,
I don't believe that UT Austin has a really good
program in agriculture. And so I told him I had no
further advice than that. It was because I was
concerned about how much money it would take to
create a high-quality program in the town. That's
such a high spike and a step in the time that I
thought it would take a while to get it. The...
Describe any opinions you had about the various
presidents after Jarvis, their relationship to
the Experiment Station and their interest in it.
Presidents, that would be Frank Vandiver, Bill
Mobley, We
had some interims. Who else was in there before
Ray? I guess just interims.
Our relationships were, of course, Bill was both
president and subsequently chancellor, and our
relationships were okay then. If you could have
the total authority to decide the organizational
structure, where would you have the stations and
the services report? To the chancellor. What
about then the dean of agriculture? To whom would
he report? To the provost. Okay. What about his
relation then to the station? Well, we've
attempted to solve that problem by nesting all of
those titles in one person. And that's one model
you find around the countryside. A&M is a big
organization, so you've got to take that into
consideration when you think about what model
might work.
really are the one we have here where all of the
titles are invested in one person or the agencies
are split up and you have one vice whatever. and
then one for academics, one for research, one for
extension, and then the other smaller agencies.
But I think Ed Heiler's shortfall is that he's
about to kill himself. He
doesn't delegate enough of the responsibilities
to his staff, immediate staff,
to get the job done. And so it slows things down and
it's hard on him. But that's a matter of execution,
not necessarily the wrong model to have. Were you
still active when Perry Edgerson was the
chancellor? Yes. All right. Now, he's a superb
researcher, coming certainly out of the working
level. How would you evaluate his understanding
of all these matters when he was chancellor?
Oh, I'd say excellent.
He knew more about the... the experiment station,
the extension service, they had a fairly small
teaching program over there in entomology. So his
experience was mostly with the agencies. And so
when he ended up over as vice president with Jarvis
and then ultimately as chancellor, his
association with the agencies and services, I
think an understanding of them was better than
probably understanding the university by a
bunch. And about that time, you know, all of these
other universities began to flow in, at least the
first wave of them. Now, did the expansion of the
Texas A&M system, did that affect the role that you
and your colleagues played in the experiment
station? Well, yes, but it didn't happen until Ed
Heiler became Vice Chancellor. And early on, he
said, and it's the responsibility of the agencies
to embrace these other campuses because we have
almost a matchup with them with our centers
at Corpus Christi and West Texas State and so on.
And we can do that better than anybody else can. And
so I'm committed. to
establishing an association with the other
campuses. So he spent a lot of time and effort at
that. And based on the conference we just had and
the attendance from these other universities,
he's still working at it pretty hard. As far as you
know, could a faculty member with the appropriate
intellectual background at UT, I mean at A&M
International at Laredo, or at A&M Commerce,
could they submit a proposal to the experiment
station and have a fair chance of getting a grant?
If the experiment station awarded grants
anymore, yeah. The old system that I described to
you a while ago that Neville started when he
scooped up a bunch of money over at the
legislature, between Charlie Harnson and Ed
Heiler, that money's about gone.
But there's a little bit of it left. And the last
attempt to award grant, yeah. these folks were
asked and they were asked to do it in an
interdisciplinary sense with other folks at the
Dallas Center and the Peace and Commerce or at
Overton. And Prairie View and Tarleton have been
down through the years. Right. Now, as far as you
know, the Extension Service theoretically would
offer them the same possibility? I think under
Hyler's directorship they would, but not before.
In general, if you could give advice to the
leadership Texas A&M today in the broad field of
agriculture. If you could advise A&M and Forestry
today, what would you advise them to do in addition
to what's already been done? How does A&M move
forward in Forestry from where it is today? I think
they need a stronger resource base. And I'm
thinking about a capital campaign type effort.
And one is in the making through the university.
And the department ought to really take advantage
of that and work with some of the foundations in the
state to develop a strong resource base. Parts of
agriculture did okay the last capital campaign,
but the department, and it was a function of the
department head. It was just something he wasn't
interested in doing. All right, and should they
put that in the capital projects or endowment?
Endowment, yeah. I'm on your side on that. Yeah,
yeah. Because I think the state ought to look to the
state to do the bricks and mortar. Oh, yeah.
Because otherwise the money is gone. Do you think
that some of the foundations and private industry
might be receptive? Oh, I think so. I think so. But,
golly, you've got to have an organized approach
and
use the resources of the foundation and this sort
of thing to go do that. Would you also advise
the department to make any changes in its research
and teaching? Are there some new areas of emphasis
that it ought to add? Not really.